# Aromaticity.

## Background
Aromaticity in chemistry software is complex. The first problem
is that there is no universally accepted definition of aromaticity,
so different software tools are free to make their own decisions
about what they label as aromatic.

This creates problems when an aromatic smiles generated by one
tool is read by another tool that does not believe that ring should
be aromatic. For that reason, LillyMol always defaults to writing
non unique smiles, which generally contain a Kekule form. Each 
software tool is then free to read that Kekule and make its own
decisions about what is aromatic.

## HOWTO
Most tools will respon to `-A help` with the following list of
commands.
```
  -A D           use Daylight aromaticity definitions
  -A P           use Pearlman aromaticity definitions
  -A WFL         use Wang Fu Lai aromaticity definitions (modified Pearlman)
  -A VJ          use Vijay Gombar definitions
  -A ALLPI       aromatic ring if every atom has pi electrons!
  -A EVEN        aromatic ring if any even number of pi electrons
  -A M           enable mixed mode aromaticity (arom and aliph)
  -A I           enable input of aromatic structures
  -A O           output aromatic structure files
  -A K           allow input of structures with no valid kekule form
  -A 2           allow systems with just two pi electrons to be arom
  -A C           allow input of delocalised carbonyl bonds (MDL only)
  -A S           discard obviously non aromatic Kekule input
  -A N           ignore aromatic atoms/bonds in chains
  -A okchain     aromatic atoms/bonds in a chain are OK
  -A tryn+       when an aromatic structure cannot be found, try protonating N atoms
  -A anyK        when reading aromatic smiles, any Kekule form is accepted
  -A usmidflt=X  set default aromaticity type for unique smiles
  -A mnars=N     min size of an aromatic ring, def 4
  -A mxars=N     max size of an aromatic ring, def 8
  -A perm=a      element 'a' is permanent aromatic type
  -A oknk        non Kekule rings like c1cccc1 can be aromatic
  -A nokekule    do not attempt Kekule form determination
  -A nabar       try to aromatise rings with just some bonds marked aromatic
  -A arom:       aromatic bonds in smiles written as :
  -A ipp         when reading smiles, allow aromatic forms from Pipeline Pilot
  -A sfrna       strongly fused can never be aromatic
  -A arallsat    a ring can be aromatic even if it contains all fully saturated atoms
  -A nbh0        no square bracket on an atom means H0
  -A maxkekule=<n> do NOT attempt Kekule->aromatic conversion if a ring system
                  contains more than <n> atoms
```

At any time in LillyMol there is an aromaticity type that is used
for computing the aromaticity of atoms and molecules. Usually that is set
once at startup before any molecules are read.

### -A D
Use Daylight aromaticity definitions.  Since Daylight never published
details of their aromaticity rules, this LillyMol aromaticity
implementation which was designed to be concordant with Medicinal Chemist
ideas, seems to frequently yield the same results as Daylight. This is the default.

### -A P
Use Pearlman aromaticity definitions. This set of rules from Bob Pearlman
takes a very restrictive view of aromaticity. Generally, unless a ring
has alternating Kekule forms, it will not be aromatic. Furan is not 
aromatic for example. This used to be the default, but was too
restrictive.

### -A WFL
Use Wang Fu Lai aromaticity definitions (modified Pearlman). Taken 
from a papr of theirs - origins lost. It is seldom used.

### -A VJ
Use Vijay Gombar definitions. Developed for some project specific needs
with Vijay.

### -A ALLPI
      aromatic ring if every atom has pi electrons!
### -A EVEN
       aromatic ring if any even number of pi electrons
### -A M
          enable mixed mode aromaticity (arom and aliph)
### -A I
          enable input of aromatic structures
### -A O
          output aromatic structure files
### -A K
          allow input of structures with no valid kekule form
### -A 2
          allow systems with just two pi electrons to be arom
### -A C
          allow input of delocalised carbonyl bonds (MDL only)
### -A S
          discard obviously non aromatic Kekule input
### -A N
          ignore aromatic atoms/bonds in chains
### -A okchain
    aromatic atoms/bonds in a chain are OK
### -A tryn+
      when an aromatic structure cannot be found, try protonating N atoms
### -A anyK
       when reading aromatic smiles, any Kekule form is accepted
### -A usmidflt=X
 set default aromaticity type for unique smiles
### -A mnars=N
    min size of an aromatic ring, def 4
### -A mxars=N
    max size of an aromatic ring, def 8
### -A perm=a
     element 'a' is permanent aromatic type
### -A oknk
       non Kekule rings like c1cccc1 can be aromatic
### -A nokekule
   do not attempt Kekule form determination
### -A nabar
      try to aromatise rings with just some bonds marked aromatic
### -A arom:
      aromatic bonds in smiles written as :
### -A ipp
        when reading smiles, allow aromatic forms from Pipeline Pilot
### -A sfrna
      strongly fused can never be aromatic
### -A arallsat
   a ring can be aromatic even if it contains all fully saturated atoms

### -A nbh0
        aromatic nitrogens in a smiles written as 'n' imply zero Hydrogen
        atoms on that atom. Because the aromaticity parsing tools were
        developed to deal with inexact representations, by default,
        aromatic nitrogen atoms, written as 'n' are allowed to gain
        a Hydrogen atom in order to aromatise a ring. Using 'nbh0' should
        probably be the default, with the other options used when
        questionable structures are being processed.

### -A maxkekule=N
   Kekule determination may take very long times when attemtpting to process a very large
   ring system containing aromatic atoms. By default, if there is a ring system with more
   than 80 atoms, Kekule determination is not attempted. Set that value with this directive.
